--- page 61 ---
               Chapter 5 – A
                    Skills, &
C    haracters of different classes have different unique
     abilities, for example, wizards can cast spells and thieves
can pick pockets. However, there are some things – such as
trying to walk along a thin ledge or trying to remember which
type of dragon breathes fire and which type breathes frost
before venturing into a lair – that any character can attempt.

These situations are handled by ability checks and skills.

ABILITY CHECKS
In general, adventurers are assumed to be competent
individuals who can do things like riding horses, starting
campfires, and swimming in calm water.

If you particularly want to play a character whose competency
is deficient in some area, for example, if you decide that you
specifically want to play a character who can't swim, then you
can do that. However, these rules assume that your character
can do all these things in calm situations unless you decide
otherwise.

That being the case, sometimes there are situations where
your character might fail. Perhaps they are trying to stay on
a horse that is bolting in fright. Perhaps they are trying to
light a fire in torrential rain. Perhaps they are trying to swim
in turbulent water without getting washed downstream.

In these cases, the Gameguide will call for an ability check
in order for your character to succeed. To make an ability
check, roll a standard check using the score (not the modifier)
of the relevant ability of your character as the bonus for the
check. As with any other check, if the total rolled is at least 20
then your character has succeeded. If the total rolled is less
than 20 then your character has failed.

In some cases, what your character is doing will be directly
opposed by another character or monster, for example, you
may be making a strength check to force open a door while
someone else is trying to hold it closed or you may be making
a dexterity check to sneak past a guard while they are looking
out for intruders.

In these cases, instead of simply succeeding if you roll a total
of 20 or higher, you and the other character or monster both

Ability Checks,
& Talents
  roll and you succeed if you roll a total equal to or higher than
  the total that they rolled and fail if you roll a total less than
  the total that they rolled. Since most people and monsters
  that characters interact with will not have a full set of ability
  scores, the Gameguide should assume that they have an
  ability score of 11 for things unrelated to their main job or
  role, 13 for things tangential to their role, or 15 for things
  essential to their role. In the case of monsters, add the number
  of hit dice the monster has to that total.

  The exact consequences of a success or a failure will depend
  on the specific situation your character faces, although it
  should be very rare (but not unheard of) for a failed ability
  check to result in death, unless the character is attempting
  something spectacularly risky.

  Example: Black Leaf has a problem. She has been granted
  an audience with Queen Eloise and wishes to use the
  opportunity to ask for some royal sponsorship to aid her
  expedition to find the fabled Eye of Harmaz. Unfortunately
  she is panicking because she cannot remember the proper
  etiquette and is afraid that she will cause offence.

  Marcie, her player, asks the Gameguide if she can make an
  ability check using Black Leaf 's intelligence in order for
  Black Leaf to remember her etiquette.

  The Gameguide agrees and Marcie rolls 1d20, getting a 4.
  Adding Black Leaf 's intelligence score of 13 make a total
  of 17, so the roll fails and Black Leaf fails to remember the
  correct etiquette for addressing the queen.

  Some time later, Black Leaf can be found getting drunk in
  an inn, her expedition without royal patronage due in part
  to the queen's offence at her frightful manners.

  MODIFIERS
  In some circumstances the Gameguide may decide that an
  ability check is particularly easy or hard. Maybe the ledge that
  the character is balancing on is slippery, or maybe the person
  that the character is trying to scrutinise in order to see if they
  are lying is wearing a mask, or maybe the piece of information
  they are trying to remember is reasonably common
  knowledge.


--- page 62 ---
           Table 5–1: Skills by Ability Score
              Situations where this
   Ability                                     Skills
                 might be checked
                 Where raw physical           Climbing
                                            Intimidation
  Strength strength      is required, such
                as lifting, pushing, or       Jumping
                         pulling.            Swimming
                                            Arcane Lore
                                            Engineering
                                             Geography
                  Where calculation,           History
Intelligence memory, or reasoning               Laws
                  ability is required.        Magical
                                            Engineering
                                            Nature Lore
                                           Religious Lore
                                              Cooking
                  Where intuition or          First Aid
                 "common sense" is          Lip Reading
  Wisdom        required. Also where         Navigating
              acuity of the senses is         Tracking
                        required.          Sense Motive
                                                Spot
                                              Balance
                                                Craft
               Where either agility or     Escape Artist
 Dexterity    fine manipulative skills
                     are required,          Performance
                                               Riding
                                               Sneak
               Where     stamina  or raw
Constitution endurance is required.               –
                                                Bluff
                                             Diplomacy
              Where personality and           Disguise
 Charisma        smooth talking are           Etiquette
                        required.            Gambling
                                            Intimidation
                                            Performance
In these cases, the Gameguide may assign a modifier to the
check. Unless there are exceptional circumstances that would
be unknown to the character, the Gameguide should always
tell the player what modifiers are going to apply before the
player rolls.

Example: Elfstar has come across an underground temple
where cultists are performing some kind of ritual in front of
a statue of a man who she assumes to be a god or great
hero of some kind.

Elfstar's player, Debbie, wishes to roll an intelligence check
in order to recognise the statue.

The Gameguide knows that although this god is not one
who has regular dealings with Elfstar's home country (if he
was, then the Gameguide would simply tell Debbie who he
is and not require a roll at all) he is commonly worshipped
in the local area and so it is likely that Elfstar will have heard
of him. He gives her a +4 bonus to her effective intelligence
for the roll, modifying it from a 9 to a 13.

Debbie rolls a 7, which when added to her effective
intelligence is 20; only just enough to succeed – so the
Gameguide tells her that Elfstar recognises the god and
tells her who he is.

USING SKILLS
Every character starts with 4 skill points, plus an extra skill
point per point of intelligence bonus. If a character has an
intelligence penalty, then this does not reduce the number
of skill points the character has.

Characters also gain extra skill points as they increase in
level. See CHAPTER 4 – CREATING A CHARACTER for details of
skill points per level.

These skill points are spent immediately on skills listed in
this chapter.

In most cases, each point spent on a particular skill will give
your character a +1 to the bonus used for ability checks that
correspond to the skill. So a character with a strength of 12
would normally need to roll an 8+ on the dice to reach the
target of 20 and succeed in an ability check to use his
strength to swim upstream in a river but if the character's
player has spent two points in the swimming skill then that
character's strength is effectively 14 when making the check
and their player will only need to roll a 6+ to reach the target
of 20.

Such skill modifiers stack with modifiers applied by the
Gameguide due to circumstances.

Example: Black Leaf is hot on the trail of the Eye of Harmaz,
and comes across a narrow rope bridge spanning a chasm.
Unfortunately the guide rope for the rope bridge is missing,
so Black Leaf will have to try to balance without its aid if
she wishes to cross. The Gameguide tells Marcie that she
will need to make a balance check (an ability check against
dexterity, using the balance skill) in order to cross the
bridge – but that the strong winds blowing through the
chasm will give her a –1 penalty to her check.


--- page 63 ---
Black Leaf has a dexterity of 16, and Marcie has spent two
points on the balance skill, so her normal skill bonus is +18.

Overall, Marcie is going to have to roll using an effective
bonus of (18 – 1=17). Marcie reckons that this is well worth
trying, but tells the Gameguide that Black Leaf is looping a
rope around the bridge and around her waist so that if she
falls off she won't plummet to her almost certain death at
the bottom of the chasm.

She also trails a rope behind her so that after she's crossed
she and the other companions can tie it off so that the less
dexterous party members will have a guide rope and not
need to cross the bridge the hard way.

HELPING
Often a task will be made easier if someone else helps. When
one character tries to do something and someone else helps,
the character who is helping should make the check first.
There is no failure for the character failing the check, but if
they succeed then the character who is performing the main
task gets a +4 bonus to their check.

Usually the check made by the helper will be of the same type
as the check made by the person performing the main task,
but occasionally the helper will be performing a different
action to the main character.

Example: Elfstar has been captured by a group of soldiers
and is being held in a tent. Black Leaf has located the tent,
but while she could almost certainly sneak in she's not sure
if she would be able to sneak out with her.

Instead, Black Leaf imitates the noise of a cuckoo to get
her wife's attention – it's a prearranged signal they have – and
then attempts to distract the soldiers who are guarding
Elfstar's tent by sneaking up to a nearby cooking pit and
kicking the roasting spit over into the coals.

Marcie makes her stealth roll for Black Leaf, and it is a
success. The guards are distracted by the sudden noise and
sparks of the roasting spit collapsing, and this distraction
means that Elfstar will get a +4 bonus to her own roll to
sneak out of the tent.

GROUP ROLLS
Sometimes there will be a situation where the whole party is
doing something together, ranging from searching a room to
sneaking past guards. Theoretically, the Gameguide could
get each player to make a roll for their character independently
and see which characters pass and which fail. However, rolling
so many dice can do counter-intuitive things to probability.

For example, if there are five characters and each has a +15
bonus on a roll, that gives each character a 3–in-4 chance of
succeeding on that particular roll. It would seem that the
odds are with them if they all try to perform a task but it's by
no means a certainty.

However, because so many dice are being rolled there is
actually over a 999–in-1000 chance that at least someone
will succeed, and over a 3–in-4 chance that at least one person
will fail; meaning that if you only needed one person to succeed
then there was basically no point asking for the roll, it was a
foregone conclusion; and if you needed everyone to succeed
then that was actually rather unlikely to happen despite each
of the individual characters having a good chance to do so.

To avoid these counter-intuitive probabilities, you should use
the following methods to determine success or failure when
a group is performing an activity together:

All with Teamwork: For some activities everyone must
succeed, because even a single individual failing will bring
failure to the whole group. However, group members are able
to assist each other. For example, if a group is trying to sneak
past some guards who are guarding a warehouse, anyone
failing means the group will be spotted so everyone needs to
succeed. However, the characters can look out for each other
and use hand signals to indicate which way to go and when
one of the guards is looking the other way so it's safe to move
and so forth. In these situations, have the member of the
group with the lowest bonus make the roll, but assume that
the member of the group with the highest bonus is helping
them.

All Individually: Sometimes everyone must succeed but it
is not possible for members of the group to meaningfully
assist each other. For example, maybe the characters are
putting on a musical performance together and each character
is playing a different instrument. If anyone plays badly it will
spoil the music, but it is difficult for any of the musicians to
meaningfully assist each other to prevent that happening. In
these situations, have the member of the group with the
lowest bonus make the roll without help from anyone else.

Anyone with Teamwork: Often not everyone will need to
succeed in the task that everyone is doing as long as someone
succeeds, and the members of the group can work together.
For example, maybe the group are all searching an office for
the key to a vault. It doesn't matter who finds it, as long as
someone does, and the characters can all help by comparing
notes of where they've looked and making suggestions. In
these situations, have the member of the group with the
highest bonus make the check and assume that the member
with the second highest bonus is helping them.


--- page 64 ---
Anyone Individually: Sometimes it only needs one person
to succeed, but there's not an easy way for members of the
group to help each other. For example, the group might be
guarding a manor house in case a pack of werewolves return.
Each member is on the lookout for them returning, but there's
not a lot any member can do to help another spot them. In
these situations, have the member of the group with the
highest bonus make the check without help from anyone else.

These rules for group checks should be used for both basic
checks performed by a group and opposed checks performed
by a group. For example, if the party are sneaking past a group
of cultists, you can combine the rules for group rolls and
opposed rolls. In this particular case, sneaking is an All with
Teamwork activity because anyone being seen will give the
game away but characters can assist each other, whereas
spotting them is an Anyone Individually activity because you
can't help each other spot something but as long as someone
spots something they can raise the alarm – you don't need
everyone to see the intruders.

Therefore, the situation would be resolved by an opposed roll
with the party member worst at sneaking (helped by the party
member best at sneaking) rolling against the cultist best at
spotting (without help). If the party roll higher, they have
successfully snuck past the cultist guards, but if the cultists
roll higher then the party have been spotted.

SOCIAL SKILLS
Special care needs to be used when using skills designed for
social situations (bluff, diplomacy, intimidation and sense
motive).

Players and Gameguides should discuss the use of these
skills before the game starts, since they have the potential
to unbalance games.

Firstly, it is recommended that these skills are never used
against players. If a player wishes to influence another player
then this should be role played rather than rolled for using
skills. Many players don't like the loss of "free will" and the
loss of control that they feel when their character is forced
into particular behaviour by dice rolls rather than because
they wanted their character to behave in that way, especially
if the forced behaviour is the result of another player's use
of social skills against them. This can be very disruptive to
your gaming group.

Secondly, the players and Gameguide should agree what
proportion of social interaction with NPCs should be governed
by skill usage and what proportion should be governed by
role play.

Some people prefer more skill usage since it means that
people can play silver-tongued characters even if they are
not good talkers themselves. Others feel that simply rolling
a diplomacy check in order to find out whether the character
can talk the king into pardoning their wrongly-imprisoned
associates is something of a dramatic let-down and prefer
to role play the issue to its conclusion. There is no single
"correct" way to play using these skills, only the way that your
group enjoys.

SPECIAL SKILLS
While most skills simply add bonuses to ability checks,
some – notably language skills – work in other ways. If a skill
works in an unusual way, this will be detailed in the skill's
individual description.

ADDING NEW SKILLS
The list of skills in this chapter is not meant to cover all
possible situations. Gameguides may require (or players may
ask for) ability checks for a variety of situations other than
those given here. If a particular situation crops up repeatedly,
a player may – with the Gameguide's permission – spend a
skill point in order to buy it as a named skill in order to get
a bonus to their effective ability score in that situation.


--- page 65 ---
SKILLS & TALENTS
Some character classes have talents that they can use, such
as the ability to pick locks or hide in shadows. These talents
represent the chance to perform feats that push the limits of
human ability or even exceed them. Anyone can climb a tree,
but only someone with the Climb Walls talent can climb a wall
made of limestone blocks by finding the tiniest of handholds
and footholds.

Each of the talents is described below, as well as how it
interacts with mundane skills such as climbing and sneaking.

Open Locks: Characters without this talent can't attempt to
pick locks under normal circumstances.

Locate Traps: Normally, when a character searches an area
or an item for traps they will roll a Spot roll with a modifier
based on how difficult the trap is to find. On a success, the
character will spot the trap, although they will only be told
what is visible about it (e.g., a trip wire, a pressure plate, or
a set of suspicious holes in the wall). They will not be told the
exact nature of the trap, such as what the trip wire or pressure
plate will trigger, or what will emerge from the holes.

A character with the Locate Traps talent may make this roll
as normal, but may also make a Locate Traps roll. If the Locate
Traps roll succeeds, the character will get all the information
they would have got from a normal Spot roll (whether they
succeeded that roll or not) and also information about the
type of trap derived from the context of the visible part and
minor but recognisable clues unnoticeable to someone without
the talent (e.g., the tripwire will cause a blade to scythe from
the wall, the pressure plate will release a falling block from
the ceiling, the holes will emit a poisonous gas).

Most magical traps cannot be found by simple Spot rolls, but
a successful Locate Traps roll will allow the character to feel
the subtle magical boundaries of the triggering area.

Example: Black Leaf and Aloysius are standing some
distance from a suspicious looking vault door, and they
suspect that the door might be trapped.

They decide to search the area, and the Gameguide makes
Spot rolls for them in secret so that the players won't know
whether or not their characters have succeeded. She also
rolls for Black Leaf's Locate Traps ability.

Aloysius's Spot roll is a success, but Black Leaf's is a failure.
However, Black Leaf's Locate Traps roll is a success.

The door is in fact trapped, with a magical trap that will
shoot a Lightning Bolt down the corridor if the door is
approached. Since this is a magical trap, Aloysius's Spot
roll won't find it (although the Gameguide doesn't tell him
that). However, Black Leaf's Locate Traps ability will.

The Gameguide informs the players that although Aloysius
can't see anything, Black Leaf can feel the tell-tale signs of
a magical ward in front of the door and that it will let off
some kind of spell if they cross into it.

Remove Traps: When faced with knowledge that there is a
trap, characters without the Remove Traps talent must simply
describe to the Gameguide what they are doing and the
Gameguide should adjudicate the results of that, whether it
triggers the trap or temporarily disables it or permanently
disables it (or does nothing to it).

Characters who have the Remove Traps talent may make a
Remove Traps roll, and if this is successful then they will have
temporarily or permanently (their choice) disarmed the trap
even if the player does not know how the character would go
about doing this.

If the Remove Traps roll fails, then the trap will activate.
However, since the character is already aware of the trap they
will probably be safe from it, unless it is a trap with such large
effects that there is no way to remove it without being inside
the area of that effect.

The Remove Traps talent can be used to disable magical traps
so that they will not activate.

Climb Walls: Any character can climb a tree or scramble up
a scree-covered slope without needing to make a roll. For
steeper and more difficult climbs, such as climbing up a rough
cliff or a wall with uneven brickwork a character without the
Climb Walls talent may make a Climbing roll to successfully
complete the climb (if it is a long climb, a roll per 100' is
required).

Characters with the Climb Walls talent can climb things that
a character without the talent would need to make a Climbing
roll for. Additionally, by making a Climb Walls roll they are
able to climb things that someone without the talent would
not even get a roll for, such as walls made from close-fitting
stone blocks with only the tiniest of handholds.

Even surfaces like smooth glass can be climbed with a
successful roll using the Climb Walls talent, although such
extreme climbs should be given a modifier to the roll by the
Gameguide.


--- page 66 ---
Move Silently: Characters who are attempting to sneak past
someone must make a Sneak check opposed by the target's
Spot check. If the result of the Sneak roll equals or beats that
of the Spot roll then the character has successfully gone
unnoticed, but if the Spot beats the Sneak then the character
has been heard.

Characters with the Move Silently talent can roll a Sneak check
as normal, but may also roll a Move Silently check. If the Move
Silently check succeeds then they have made no noise at all
and will have successfully gone unnoticed regardless of the
result of their target's Spot check. If the Move Silently check
fails then compare the Sneak check and Spot check as
normal.

Hide in Shadows: As with Move Silently, characters without
the Hide in Shadows talent may still attempt to hide from
targets and to do so they must roll a Sneak roll that equals
or beats the Spot roll of the character they are hiding from.

Characters with the Hide in Shadows talent may make a Hide
in Shadows roll as well as a Sneak roll, and if the Hide in
Shadows roll is a success then the character is not visible
and will not be seen regardless of the result of the target's
Spot check. If the Hide in Shadows roll fails then compare
the Sneak roll and the Spot roll as normal.

Pick Pockets: Characters without this talent can't attempt
to pick pockets under normal circumstances.

Hear Noise: Any character can make a Spot check to listen
for quiet noises, and if the check succeeds they will hear any
quiet noises that it would be reasonable for them to hear,
such as whispered conversation, gentle snoring, the noise of
boots walking on a stone floor, or the whirr of machinery.
Obviously loud noises need no such check and can be heard
without a roll.

A character with the Hear Noise talent can automatically hear
noises that a character without the talent would have to roll
to hear, and with a successful Hear Noise roll they can hear
extremely quiet noises that would not normally be picked up
by someone with a Spot check such as the noise of someone
breathing or the scratching of a quill or the rustle of clothing
as someone shifts and fidgets in their seat.

Read Languages: Characters without this talent can't
attempt to read text in languages they don't know, or which
is encrypted in an unknown manner.

Wizard Scroll Use: Characters without this talent can't use
wizard scrolls unless they have the ability to cast wizard spells.

ALPHABETIC SKILL LISTING
ARCANE LORE
Each point spent on the arcane lore skill gives a +1 bonus to
intelligence checks made to recognise spells, magical effects,
and magical creatures.

An "average" spell or effect (at the Gameguide's discretion)
will give no bonus or penalty to the effective intelligence used
for the roll, but a particularly common spell might give a
bonus and a particularly rare spell might give a penalty.
Relative obscurity is more important in this regard than level
of power.

Note: Arcane lore checks should not be used to allow the
players to identify magic items without using the Analyse
spell.

BALANCE
Each point spent on the balance skill gives a +1 bonus to
dexterity checks made to keep one's footing on a small (or
moving) surface or to cross narrow ledges, beams or even
tightropes.

Modifiers to the effective dexterity score used for the roll can
come from a wide variety of factors. Examples include:

■ Strong wind
■ Slippery surfaces
■ Heavily encumbered character
■ Trying to move quicker (or slower) than a normal walk
■ Particularly narrow (or wide) ledges
■ Trying to balance while dodging attacks
■ Using a pole for balance

BLUFF
Each point spent on the bluff skill gives a +1 bonus to charisma
checks made to convince NPCs of things without evidence.
While the skill is most often used to convince NPCs of untruths,
it can also be used to make a convincing emotional argument
in favour of something you know is true but cannot prove to
be true.

Bluff checks should get modifiers for both the plausibility of
what is being claimed and the potential consequences of the
bluff to the target of the skill. A guard who may get executed
if they let a potential assassin into the royal palace will be
harder to bluff your way past than a merchant who may make
a bit less profit if you manage to convince him that you should
get a discount because you're a member of the city watch.


--- page 67 ---
Note: See social skills for a warning about how some uses of
this skill may disrupt the game.

CLIMBING
Each point spent on the climbing skill gives a +1 bonus to
strength checks made to climb cliffs and walls.

Simple things like climbing a tree should not require a roll,
and modifiers to the effective strength used for this roll should
be based on how steep and smooth the surface being climbed
is and how much it has in the way of hand holds and foot
holds.

Note: See the Skills and Talents section for how this skill
interacts with the Climb Walls talent.

COOKING
Each point spent on the cooking skill gives a +1 bonus to
wisdom checks made to cook.

Modifiers to the effective wisdom used for this roll are likely
to be only rarely needed, except in the case of not having
adequate equipment or when using ingredients that the
character has never cooked before.

In most cases, failing a cooking check won't result in inedible
food; merely food that is not as nice as that produced by a
successful cooking check.

CRAFT (CHOOSE MEDIUM)
The craft skill is not a single skill. It is a group of related skills
used when making things of different types. When spending
a skill point on this skill, you must specify what sort of craft
your character is skilled at.

An exhaustive list of possible craft skills is not possible, but
examples include:

■ Carpentry
■ Smithing
■ Fletching
■ Skinning
■ Leather-working
■ Rope binding
■ Tailoring
■ Gem cutting
■ Forgery
■ Masonry
■ Thatching
■ Drawing/painting
■ Sculpture

Each skill point spent on a specific craft skill gives a +1 bonus
to dexterity checks used to make items with that craft.

Modifiers to the effective dexterity used in craft rolls can
come from high or low quality materials and tools, as well as
time constraints. Depending on what is being made, success
may not be an all-or-nothing affair – a failed craft check is
likely to still result in a finished item. However, the quality of
the finished product should be subjectively determined by
the amount that the craft check succeeded by or failed by.

Craft skills can also be used to assess the workmanship of
items made using that skill. For example, skill at carpentry
can be used to help find the weak spot in a door, or skill at
smithing can help judge how good a sword is. The exact
details of this are left to the Gameguide's discretion. However,
in no case should a craft skill be able to be used to determine
magical properties of an item.

DIPLOMACY
Each point spent on the diplomacy skill gives a +1 bonus to
charisma checks made to work out compromises and calm
tensions. Diplomacy checks should get modifiers for both the
amount of hostility between the parties and the amount that
either side has to lose if the diplomacy fails.

For example, trying to persuade the leader of a marauding
band of pirates not to attack a small and lightly armed party
is going to be much more difficult than trying to persuade an
offended landlady that you shouldn't be thrown out of her inn
and you should be allowed to spend your spare cash there
instead.

Note: See social skills for a warning about how some uses of
this skill may disrupt the game.

DISGUISE
Each point spent on the disguise skill gives a +1 bonus to
charisma checks made to disguise a character as someone
else. These checks should be made when the disguise is first
worn; with modifiers based on the answers to the following:

■ Is the disguise meant to look like a specific person, or
  merely not look like the wearer?
■ Is the disguise intended to make the character look like a
  different gender and/or species?
■ Is the disguise meant to only be seen from a distance or
  is it intended for close scrutiny?
■ Is the disguise intended to fool close acquaintances of
  subject (or wearer) of the disguise?
■ Does the person applying the disguise have access to make
  up and prosthetics?


--- page 68 ---
The exact value of these modifiers should be determined by
the Gameguide on a case by case basis, and the Gameguide
should roll the dice for the check so that the player doesn't
know whether or not their character's disguise will successfully
fool people.

A disguise that fails to achieve its target intentions may still
work to a lesser extent.

Example: Black Leaf wishes to gain access to the back
room of the cartographer's guild in order to steal a map
that she thinks may be there despite the guild members'
denials. While her allies "accidentally" encounter one of the
guild members in an inn and get him drunk, Black Leaf
disguises herself as the guild member.

The Gameguide decides that because Black Leaf is trying
to impersonate a specific person of the opposite gender,
she should get a –4 penalty to her effective charisma when
making the disguise check.

However, since she has deliberately chosen to impersonate
the guild member who most closely resembles her in terms
of build and facial features (gender notwithstanding) the
Gameguide reduces the penalty to a –3.

Unfortunately Black Leaf 's charisma is only a rather
average 11, and the penalty means it is effectively only an 8
for this roll. The Gameguide rolls a 10.

Since she only failed by a small amount – and would have
succeeded if not for the penalties – the Gameguide decides
that Black Leaf 's disguise is not going to fool people into
thinking she is the guild member unless seen only from a
distance, but is enough that people seeing her will not
recognise her real identity.

ENGINEERING
Each point spent on the engineering skill gives a +1 bonus
to intelligence checks made to design machinery or identify
the function of existing machinery such as siege weaponry
or orreries.

Modifiers to the effective intelligence used for checks to
identify machinery should come from the complexity of the
machinery being examined.

In terms of the design of machinery, the Gameguide should
also take into account the technological level of the campaign
and should veto the "invention" of devices that rely on
principles unknown in the game world.

Similarly, the presence of magic in the game world may mean
that the laws of nature work differently there than in the real
world, so at the Gameguide's discretion machinery relying
on certain physical principles (e.g., Combustion powered guns
or engines) may not work at all.

Note: although this skill can be used to identify how a large
mechanical trap works, it should not be used as a replacement
for either the Locate Traps or Remove Traps talents. At best,
knowing how the trap functions may give insight into how the
trap may be bypassed by mundane means.

ESCAPE ARTIST
Each point spent on the escape artist skill gives a +1 bonus
to dexterity checks made to escape from bonds or ties. The
effective dexterity used for this check should be modified by
the extent to which the character is tied. Escaping from simply
having one's hands tied with a scarf should be much easier
than escaping from iron manacles.

Note: Although this skill allows the character to wriggle free
from locked manacles or padlocked chains, it does not allow
the actual picking of those locks.

ETIQUETTE (CHOOSE CULTURE)
The etiquette skill is not a single skill. It is a group of related
skills used in social situations in a variety of cultures. Each
point spent in the etiquette skill for a particular culture gives
a +1 bonus to charisma rolls used to behave properly in formal
social situations in that culture.

Modifiers to the effective charisma used for these checks
should come from particularly common or particularly obscure
social situations within that culture.

FIRST AID
Each point spent in the first aid skill gives a +1 bonus on
wisdom rolls used to treat injuries and poison.

The most common use of this skill is to patch people up after
they have taken damage. After each time a character has
been injured (a whole combat only counts as a single injury
for this purpose) they can be healed 1d3 of the hit points lost
in this particular injury by someone making a successful first
aid check.

Each character using the skill is only able to make one attempt
per injury, and if this first attempt fails then further attempts
will not succeed. If someone succeeds with a first aid check
against a particular injury then further first aid checks will be
of no benefit.


--- page 69 ---
All hit points lost in a fight counts as a single injury for the
purposes of the first aid skill.

The other use of the skill is to prevent people from dying
when they have been poisoned. See CHAPTER 12 – GETTING
BETTER for detailed rules on poison.

There are normally no modifiers to the effective wisdom used
in first aid checks.

Example: Black Leaf is unlucky enough to fall down a pit,
and is injured, taking 5 points of damage out of her 9 hit
points, leaving her on 4 hit points.

She uses the first aid skill to treat this injury, and succeeds
in her roll. Her player rolls 1d3 to see how many hit points
are recovered and unfortunately only gets a 1. Black Leaf
now recovers one of the hit points lost in the injury, taking
her from 4 hit points to 5 hit points.

Since she has now had this injury treated, further first aid
rolls won't be able to recover any more of the lost hit points.

Shortly afterwards, the party encounters some ruffians
spoiling for a fight. After a brief combat with the ruffians,
Black Leaf has lost another 2 hit points, leaving her with 3.

While the party are resting, she tries to use the first aid skill
on herself in order to recover some of these hit points. The
skill check is not successful and Black Leaf is unable to heal
this injury, and cannot try again.

Seeing that her wife is still injured, Elfstar tries to use the
skill on her. Elfstar's player succeeds her skill check and
rolls 1d3 to see how much is healed, getting a 3. Although
Black Leaf has lost a total of 6 hit points, only 2 were lost
in the injury being treated by the skill roll, so the first aid
can only result in the recovery of these 2 hit points.

GAMBLING
Each point spent on the gambling skill gives a +1 bonus to
charisma checks made to determine who wins in games of
skill and chance. Modifiers to the effective charisma used for
gambling checks should be rare, but may be used for games
that the character is unfamiliar with.

The simple way to use this skill is to simulate a single game
or round in a game, by each character making a gambling
check, and the game or round is won by the character who
gets the highest total on their roll.

At the Gameguide's discretion, individual gambling games
can be devised for their game world, which may operate on
a more complex basis.

Note: This skill is designed for games where psychology,
bluffing, and second-guessing opponents are an essential
part of the game play. The skill does not represent a
supernatural "luck" type of ability and should not be used to
determine the outcome of games of pure chance.

GEOGRAPHY
Each point spent on the geography skill gives a +1 bonus to
intelligence checks made to recollect information about
countries and regions of the game world.

The use of this skill should be modified by the obscurity of
the facts that the player wishes their character to recollect.
Knowing the name of a country and the majority ethnic group
that lives there should be easier than knowing the name of
the palace in which the king of that country lives or knowing
the major trade imports and exports of that country.

HISTORY
Each point spent on the history skill gives a +1 bonus to
intelligence checks made to recollect information about the
game world's past. The use of this skill should be modified
by the obscurity of the facts that the player wishes their
character to recollect. Knowing the name of countries involved
in a war a couple of generations ago should be easier than
knowing the name of the vizier of an empire that hasn't existed
for thousands of years.

INTIMIDATION
Each point spent on the intimidation skill gives a +1 bonus
to both charisma checks and strength checks made to bully
an NPC into co-operation through threats or shows of physical
strength. Intimidation checks should get modifiers for both
the plausibility of the threats being made and the potential
consequences to the target of the skill for co-operation.

Using a threat of immediate physical violence to get a bandit
to flee is both a realistic threat and has only minor
consequences to the bandit if they do flee; so it should be
easier than using a threat of sending a dragon to kill the
family of an ogre if they don't betray their tribe's location to
you, which is both an unrealistic threat and has potentially
fatal consequences to the ogre and their tribe.

Note: See social skills for a warning about how some uses of
this skill may disrupt the game.


--- page 70 ---
JUMPING
Each point spent on the jumping skill gives a +1 bonus to
strength checks made to jump long distances. Rather than
giving modifiers to the effective strength based on the
intended length or height of the jump, the nature of jumping
means that a jump will always be successfully made but the
distance of the jump will depend on the result of the check.

With a running start, a character can jump 10' horizontally
or 4' vertically (remember that if the character is jumping up
to reach something then the character's height should be
added to the vertical distance jumped in order to determine
how high they can reach).

The effects of the roll depend on whether the character is
jumping for height or length. For each point that the character
succeeds the jump check by in the case of a long jump, they
jump an extra foot horizontally. For each two points that the
character fails the jump check by they jump a foot less
horizontally. In the case of a high jump, for each two points
the character succeeds the jump roll by they jump a foot
higher, and for each four points the character fails by they
jump a foot less high.

In either case, jumping from a standing start means that only
half of the total distance (after modification) can be jumped.

Example: Black Leaf has a strength of only 9, but has spent
two skill points on the jump skill – so she has an effective
strength of 11 when making jump checks.

After having fallen into a 10' deep pit, she needs to try to
get out. Her player announces that she will try to jump up
and grab the edge of the pit.

The pit is 10' deep, and Black Leaf is 5'5 tall; so in order to
reach the edge of the pit she will have to jump just over four
and a half feet. Luckily for Black Leaf, the pit is 20' wide, so
she has chance to get a run up at the jump.

Marcie rolls a 14, for a total check result of 14+11=25, which
is five points better than the 20 that she needed to roll, so
Black Leaf jumps two and a half feet more than the default 4',
for a total of six and a half feet – more than enough to grab
the edge of the pit and pull herself out.

Had Black Leaf not been able to take a run up, the total
distance jumped would have been halved from six and a
half feet down to just over three feet – not high enough to
get out.

LANGUAGE (CHOOSE LANGUAGE)
Each skill point spent on the language skill means that the
character knows another language to an acceptable level that
they can converse. However, even though the character
speaks the language, their speech will be accented and they
will be clearly noticeable as a foreigner.

If a character spends a second skill point on the same
language, their skill increases to the point where they speak
it like a native and no longer have a noticeable foreign accent.

The Gameguide will determine which languages exist in their
game world.

LAWS (CHOOSE CULTURE)
The law skill is not a single skill. It is a group of related skills
used in legal situations in a variety of cultures. Each point
spent in the law skill for a particular culture gives a +1 bonus
to intelligence checks used to recall/interpret the laws and
customs of that country.

Modifiers to the effective charisma used for these checks
should come from particularly common or particularly obscure
customs within that culture. For example, knowing that a
country has the death penalty for banditry is much easier
than knowing that the country requires anyone setting up a
market stall to buy a trading license from the alderman of the
town.

LIP READING
Each point spent on the lip reading skill gives a +1 bonus to
wisdom checks made to understand what someone is saying
even when you can't hear them by watching the movement
of their mouth. Modifiers to the effective wisdom used for
this skill should be used based on how clearly the person's
mouth can be seen, whether they are deliberately enunciating
clearly in order to make it easy for you to lip read, and whether
you are a native speaker of the language they are speaking
(i.e., It's a starting language or you spent two skill points on
it) or whether you are merely fluent in it (i.e., You spent one
skill point on it).

MAGICAL ENGINEERING
Each point spent on the magical engineering skill gives a +1
bonus to intelligence checks made to design large scale
magical effects or identify the function of existing effects
such as wormholes, gates, and some large scale magical
traps.

Modifiers to the effective intelligence used for checks to
identify such magic should come from the obscurity of the
effect being examined. Something that uses a standard spell


--- page 71 ---
effect should be easier than something that uses a unique
effect. When designing such effects, this skill is used for the
design itself, but the building of large-scale magical
constructions will involve spell casting and crafting skills.

Note: although this skill can be used to identify how a large
magical trap works, it should not be used as a replacement
for either the Locate Traps or remove traps abilities. At best,
knowing how the trap functions may give insight into how the
trap may be bypassed by mundane means.

NATURE LORE
Each point spent on the nature lore skill gives a +1 bonus to
intelligence checks made to recognise plants, natural terrain
features, and natural creatures.

Most natural creatures or terrain features will give no bonus
or penalty to the effective intelligence used for the roll, but a
particularly common plant or animal might give a bonus and
a particularly rare one might give a penalty.

NAVIGATING
Each point spent in the navigating skill gives a +1 bonus on
wisdom rolls used to avoid getting lost by using landmarks
and the position of the sun and stars.

The effective wisdom used for navigating checks may be
modified by factors such as weather conditions, visibility,
access (or lack of it) to equipment such as maps and/or
sextants, and familiarity with the area being travelled.

PERFORMANCE (CHOSE MEDIUM)
The performance skill is not a single skill. It is a group of
related skills used when putting on different types of artistic
performance. When spending a skill point on this skill, you
must specify what sort of artistic performance your character
is skilled at. An exhaustive list of possible artistic media is
not possible, but examples include:

■ Singing
■ Playing a musical instrument
■ Dancing
■ Acting
■ Juggling
■ Jesting
■ Storytelling
■ Poetry

Each skill point spent on a specific performance skill gives
a +1 bonus to both dexterity checks and charisma checks
used to make these artistic performances.

Modifiers to the effective dexterity or charisma used in
performance rolls can come from such things as particularly
high or low quality costume and how much rehearsal time the
performance has had.

Success in a performance may not be an all-or-nothing
affair – a failed performance check is likely to still result in a
performance of some kind. However, the quality of the finished
work should be subjectively determined by the amount that
the performance check succeeded by or failed by.

RELIGIOUS LORE
Each point spent on the religious lore skill gives a +1 bonus
to intelligence checks made to recall knowledge about
religions, their targets of worship, and the creatures
associated with them.

The effective intelligence score used for the religious lore
check should be modified by the obscurity of the knowledge
being sought. Identifying a statue of a well-known god should
be much easier than identifying the purpose of a particular
religious rite from a foreign religion.

Note: Characters should be assumed to know all about the
rites and details of their own religion without needing to make
religious lore checks.

RIDING (CHOOSE ANIMAL)
The riding skill is not a single skill. It is a group of related
skills used when making rolls to control or stay on various
riding animals in unusual circumstances. When spending a
skill point on this skill, you must specify what sort of animal
your character is skilled at riding. An exhaustive list of animals
is not possible, but examples include:

■ Horse (includes mules and donkeys)
■ Camel
■ Elephant
■ Dire wolf
■ Griffon
■ Pegasus
■ Hippogriff
■ Giant eagle

Each skill point spent on a specific riding skill gives a +1
bonus to dexterity checks used to ride that type of animal.
Generally, simply riding a calm animal as it walks shouldn't
require a riding check. However, staying on an animal when
it bolts or stumbles, or when it is damaged by an attack,
should require a check – with the effective dexterity modified
by the exact circumstances provoking the check.


--- page 72 ---
SENSE MOTIVE
Each point spent on the sense motive skill gives a +1 bonus
to wisdom checks made to read the expressions and body
language of NPCs in order to tell if they have an ulterior
motive for their speech or behaviour. The skill is most often
used to detect when an NPC is lying, although it can also in
other situations, for example, to try to tell if an NPC who is
ignoring a character who is hiding is deliberately ignoring
that character while trying to keep an eye on them or whether
they simply haven't seen them.

Note: See social skills for a warning about how some uses of
this skill may disrupt the game.

SNEAK
Each point spent on the sneak skill gives a +1 bonus to
dexterity checks made to hide or move quietly without being
noticed. The skill is normally used in an opposed manner
against the spot skill of the target that might notice the
sneaking character.

Note: See Skills and Talents for how this interacts with the
Hide in Shadows and Move Silently talents.

SPOT
Each point spend on the spot skill gives a +1 bonus to wisdom
checks used to notice things such as prepared ambushes,
hidden creatures, and traps.

Note: See Skills and Talents for how this interacts with the
Hide in Shadows, Move Silently, and Locate Traps talents.

SWIMMING
Each point spent on the swimming skill gives a +1 bonus to
strength checks made to swim while weighed down or in fast
flowing or turbulent waters. Characters are assumed to be
able to swim in calm water (provided they are not weighed
down) without needing to make a swimming check, but heavily
encumbered characters or characters trying to swim in difficult
conditions will need to make such checks.

The effective strength used for swimming checks should be
given modifiers based on the specific conditions that the
character is trying to swim in, such as those listed above.

TRACKING
Each point spent on the tracking skill gives a +1 bonus to
wisdom checks made to follow the tracks left by one or more
creatures. Following (at a slow walk) a single human sized
creature who walked through light woodland or farmland less
than a day ago would require a roll with no modifiers.

The effective wisdom used for the tracking check should be
modified by many factors such as:

■ Number of creatures being tracked
■ Size of creatures being tracked
■ Method of locomotion of creatures being tracked
■ Age of the tracks
■ Terrain being tracked through
■ Weather conditions
■ Tracking as a speed faster than a slow walk
